# connect4
Created for CS50 at Harvard's final project

Here is the link to our YouTube video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1zWkhVZ0riY

We created a website that allows you to play Connect 4 in both a two-player format and a single player format. The single player format means that you are competing against a bot that makes its move immediately after ours.

This project is built with Flask—very similar to the way the Finance part of PSET 9 was. To get started, cd into the connect4 directory using terminal. Once you are in the correct directory, execute the “flask run” command in your terminal to generate the URL for the website. You can then copy and paste that link into your browser or command click it to open the page.

After loading our website URL, a screen will pop up that prompts the user for login information. This same page can be accessed when clicking the “Log In” button in the top right corner. If you have already created an account in our system, then you may type in your username and password and click the blue “Login” button underneath the text boxes. If you have not created an account in our system, you may click the “Register” button in the top right corner of the page. This will take you to another page that displays username, password, and password confirmation text boxes. You must create and input a username and a password that has at least 7 characters—including both upper and lower case letters and 1 numerical character. Once clicking the blue “Register” button, your account will be created and you can log in on the Log In page using the username and password you just created.

Once a user is logged in, there will be a button in the top right that says “Log Out”. This will log the user out of their account and return the website back to the log in page so another user can log in.

Once logging into your account, the homepage of our website will appear with the words “Welcome to Connect 4” displayed in large letters on the screen. In the top left corner, there is a text that writes “CS50nnect 4.” This is actually a button that when clicked, brings the user back to the homepage. The button just to the right reads “Stats.” This page will display the current rating, number of wins, number of losses, and number of ties of the user. As you play more games, the value in each of the boxes will change accordingly. To the right of the “Stats” button, there is a “History” button. Clicking this button will take you to a page that displays your match history. The match time, match result, and opponent’s username of every match played will all be displayed on this screen.

Now for playing Connect4. On the center body of the homepage, the website will present you with two options for how many players will be playing: “1 Player (vs. CPU)” or “2 Players”. The user will select one of the two options depending on the nature of the game they wish to play. If you want a single player game and wish to compete against a computer bot, then you will select the single player mode. After selecting this mode, another set of options will appear underneath that prompts you to select the level of difficulty in the computer bot. After selecting which difficulty you wish to compete against, click the blue “Play” button. If you wish to compete against a friend in the 2 player mode, select the “2 Players” button. This will lead to a username and password text box appearing underneath that allows the second player to input their information so the match can be recorded in their history as well. Once filling in the two text boxes with a valid username and password, select the blue “Play” button.

For both cases, selecting the blue “Play” button will display the connect 4 board in the center of the page. Player 1 will move first and make their move on the board by clicking the “Drop here” button just above the column for which they wish to insert their chip. For the single player case, after making the first move, the computer bot will instantly make their move and be displayed on the board. For the 2 player case, the page will now prompt the second player to make their move. The second player will follow the same process of clicking the “Drop here” button above the column that they choose. This process will continue until either a 4 in a row is made or the entire board is filled which results in a tie. After finishing the game, the board will freeze and the result will be displayed at the top of the screen just above the large “Game over.” words. Below the board, there will be the “Play again” button that allows you to play again in the exact same format as the previous game. This means that if you played against the easy bot, the “Play again” button will create a new game against the easy bot. If you are playing with 2 players and click “Play again” the second players username and password will be stored and a rematch will begin. There is also a “Go home” button that brings the user back to homepage where you can start a new game with different customizations or check your statistics and history.
